Guidelines on Licensing and DCO for Radicle (#5)
radicle-dev/radicle-decisions: proposals/0003.md

Origin (DCO)](./path/to/DCO). This document was created by the Linux Kernel community and is a
simple statement that you, as a contributor, have the legal right to make the
contribution.

In order to show your agreement with the DCO you should include at the end of the commit message,
the following line: Signed-off-by: John Doe <john.doe@example.com>, using your real name and email.

This can be done easily using the -s flag on the git commit.

If you find yourself pushed a few commits without Signed-off-by, you can still add it afterwards.

### Fixing the DCO

If you did not sign one or more of your commits then it is not all for not. The
crowd at `src-d` have a wonderful guide on how to remedy this situation
[here](https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/building-a-strong-community/creating-a-pull-request-template-for-your-repository)

## License Header

As part of our license, we must include a license header at the top of each
source file. The template for this header can be found
[here](./path/to/license-header). If you are creating a new file in the
repository you will have to add this header to the file.
```

## DCO Bot

> To ensure that all commits by an outside contributor are signed we SHALL add a

Reviewer: Could we change terminology to `signed-off` vs `signed`, where `signed` means that it is _cryptographically_ signed?

[DOC bot][dco-bot] to monitor pull requests on our repositories.

## Merging Pull Requests

> We SHALL NOT merge pull requests using the GitHub CI. This is due to GitHub

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We SHALL NOT merge pull requests using the GitHub UI. This is due to GitHub
```

> creating commits on our behalf using a bot. These commits will not be signed.

Reviewer 3: I’m wondering whether we want to specify the actual process for this in this document. For example whether we use merge commits are fast-forwards and who pushes the changes to master. Alternatively we can do this later in the different repos.

Reviewer: I think this section is a bit inaccurate: technically, a merge commit which does not alter the `tree` does not bear any copyrightable contribution _per definitionem_, and thus does not need a sign-off. It is, however, not entirely clear if THE GREEN BUTTON always does the right thing wrt to `Signed-off-by`, especially when the branch to be merged contains commits by multiple authors. Therefore, not using THE GREEN BUTTON is preferable.

I do **not** think we actually have to require that all commits be _cryptographically_ signed, only release tags (but that is a separate discussion).

Not wanting commits made by GitHub (which, coincidentally, _are_ cryptographically signed) is an entirely separate issue, and only a matter of policy.

It is RECOMMENDED that the repository is set up with a rebasing strategy to

> ensure the history is only made up of signed commits.

Reviewer 3: What does this mean? Are you referring to the “Merge Button” setting of a Github repo or a branch protection rule? Does this even apply if we don’t merge via the Github UI?

Author: Ya, so we don't merge via the button. But I was thinking in the case that somebody _does_ press the button then if it's a rebase then there's no extra commit.

Reviewer 3: So you’re referring to the “Allow rebase merging” “Merge Button” setting. Even with that the history will not be made up of signed commits because Github will create new commits for every commit in the PR.

Reviewer 4: I've tested it and the "rebase merge" on GitHub is just broken. Even if you merge a fast-forward branch, it will still rebase it with its dirty unsigned fingers.

Author: Ach! Thanks for checking. One other idea is to require 6 maintainers to approve which we rarely get :joy:

Reviewer: As per my other [comment](https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-decisions/pull/5/files#r531633613), I am not against allowing squash commits via THE GREEN BUTTON. There, the button-operator will have the opportunity to review the commit message (just make sure you don't add a `Signed-off-by` on behalf of someone else lol).

The only reason to not use THE GREEN BUTTON at all is not wanting GitHub as a contributor.

Reviewer: Oh wait, scrap that. A squash merge _MUST_ be signed-off. As it's not you, but GitHub, who introduces a _new_ `tree`, you would need to add _your_ `Signed-off-by` in the textbox. At this point, the CLI will win in terms of convenience.

* Title: *Licensing and DCO*
* Champion: *@FintanH/fintan.halpenny@gmail.com@*
* Conversation:
    * https://radicle.community/t/radicle-licensing-model/282
    * https://radicle.community/t/were-implementing-a-developer-certificate-of-origin-dco/303
* References:
    * [Linux Kernel DCO][dco]
    * [GPLv3 License][gplv3]

# Summary

> The decision here is to implement our software under the license of

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The decision here is to implement most of the Radicle software under the license of GPLv3 + Radicle Linking Exception. We are also asking outside contributors to sign-off on their commits to our software, as described by our Developer Certificate of Origin (DCO).
```

GPLv3+linking exception. This also means that outside contributors must sign-off
on their commits to our software, as described by our Developer Certificate of Origin (DCO).

# Explanation

Most of the explanation of why we are doing this is recorded in the
`radicle.community` links above. What this means is that all repositories under
`radicle-dev` must comply with the following sections.

# Recommendation

In this section we include the templates that need to be included and also other
recommendations to make the licensing experience as smooth as possible for both
contributors and core developers.

## License File

Every repository MUST include a `LICENSE` file which corresponds to this
[file][license-file].

**Note** that there are placeholders `<project>` which correspond to the
name of the repository. You MUST replace these with the actual name.

### Shared Libraries

It is RECOMMENDED that shared libraries be licensed permissively with

> `Apache-2.0 OR MIT`, which can be found [here][apache] and [here][mit].

Reviewer 5: @cloudhead Are we moving forward with MIT only?

A shared library is defined as one that does not implement aspects of the
protocol.

## DCO File

Every repository MUST include a `DCO` which corresponds to this
[file][dco-file].

> ## License Header

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Copyright and License Header
```

**Note** that there is a choice between `The Radicle Foundation` OR `Monadic GmbH`.
`Monadic GmbH` is reserved for `radicle-upstream` while `The Radicle Foundation`
is used for any protocol related repositories.

Also included is a [script][license-header-check] for checking the
license-header for Rust files.

## CONTRIBUTING File

Every repository MUST include a `CONTRIBUTING.md` file. The
inclusion of the `CONTRIBUTING.md` file will mean that GitHub will prompt new
contributors to look at the file before making a pull request.

The file must include the following section:

```
## Certificate of Origin

By contributing to this project, you agree to the [Developer Certificate of
Origin (DCO)](./path/to/DCO). This document was created by the Linux Kernel community and is a
simple statement that you, as a contributor, have the legal right to make the
contribution.

In order to show your agreement with the DCO you should include at the end of the commit message,
the following line: Signed-off-by: John Doe <john.doe@example.com>, using your real name and email.

This can be done easily using the -s flag on the git commit.

> If you find yourself pushed a few commits without Signed-off-by, you can still add it afterwards.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If you've found you've pushed a few commits without signed-off-by, you can still add it afterwards.
```

### Fixing the DCO

If you did not sign-off one or more of your commits then it is not all for not. The
crowd at `src-d` have a wonderful guide on how to remedy this situation
[here](https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/building-a-strong-community/creating-a-pull-request-template-for-your-repository)

> ## License Header
> 
> As part of our license, we must include a license header at the top of each
> source file. The template for this header can be found
> [here](./path/to/license-header). If you are creating a new file in the
> repository you will have to add this header to the file.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Copyright and License Header

For consistency and clarity, we must include a header at the top of each
source file. The template for this header can be found
[here](./path/to/license-header). If you are creating a new file in the
repository you will have to add this header to the file.
```

```

## DCO Bot

To ensure that all commits by an outside contributor are signed-off we SHALL add a
[DOC bot][dco-bot] to monitor pull requests on our repositories.

## Merging Pull Requests

We SHALL NOT merge pull requests using the GitHub UI. This is to avoid having
GitHub as a contributor and to ensure that our developers are adding a sign-off
to the squash commit.

Our maintainers should follow the following checklist when merging a pull
request:
- [ ] Has the PR received the appropriate number of approvals?
- [ ] Has the CI finished and passed all the tests?
- [ ] Does the DCO bot say all commits have been signed-off?

This will be indicated by the green checks in the GitHub UI. Once you are
satisfied then you can use:

```
$ git merge -s --squash
```

Since this commit could contain several authors it is RECOMMENDED that you do a
double-check for all sign-offs.

At this point you SHALL add a final sign-off:

```
Signed-off-by: John Doe <john.doe@example.com>
```

## Monadic Sign-offs

> While it is not strictly necessary, we are RECOMMENDING that all maintainers
> from Monadic sign-off on their commits as well. The easiest way to set this is
> up by including it a `git commit` alias, for example:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
While it is not strictly necessary, we are RECOMMENDING that maintainers
from Monadic sign-off on their commits as well. The easiest way to set this is
up by including it a `git commit` alias, for example:
```

```
# gcs for git-commit-sign-off
alias gcs="git commit -s"
```

## Pull Request Template

It is RECOMMENDED that the repository contains [pull request
template][pr-template] which has the following checklist:

```
- [ ] Have you [signed-off](./path/to/CONTRIBUTING.md) on all your commits?
- [ ] Did you include the [license header](./path/to/CONTRIBUTING.md) in any new
  files you created?
```

# Open Questions

* How do we enforce CI has passed before merging into the main-line branch?

> * Do we use our @monadic.xyz emails or do we use our GitHub emails?

Reviewer 5: Using our @monadic.xyz isn't absolutely critical - but it makes things more clear and consistent from a legal perspective.

* Title: *Licensing and DCO*
* Champion: *@FintanH/fintan.halpenny@gmail.com@*
* Conversation:
    * https://radicle.community/t/radicle-licensing-model/282
    * https://radicle.community/t/were-implementing-a-developer-certificate-of-origin-dco/303
* References:
    * [Linux Kernel DCO][dco]
    * [GPLv3 License][gplv3]

# Summary

The decision here is to implement our software under the license of
GPLv3+linking exception. This also means that outside contributors must sign off
on their commits to our software, as described by our Developer Certificate of Origin (DCO).

# Explanation

Most of the explanation of why we are doing this is recorded in the
`radicle.community` links above. What this means is that all repositories under
`radicle-dev` must comply with the following sections.

# Recommendation

In this section we include the templates that need to be included and also other
recommendations to make the licensing experience as smooth as possible for both
contributors and core developers.

## License File

Every repository MUST include a `LICENSE` file which corresponds to this

> [file][license-file].

Reviewer: The license file actually needs to include the linking exception text (at the top?).

Reviewer 4: ~There are also SPDX headers, which indicate the license in a single line. Not sure about the legal might of these though~ SPDX doesn't support our license flavor

## DCO File

Every repository MUST include a `DCO` which corresponds to this
[file][dco-file].

## CONTRIBUTING File

Every repository MUST include a `CONTRIBUTING.md` file. The
inclusion of the `CONTRIBUTING.md` file will mean that GitHub will prompt new
contributors to look at the file before making a pull request.

The file must include the following section:

```
## Certificate of Origin

By contributing to this project, you agree to the [Developer Certificate of
Origin (DCO)](./path/to/DCO). This document was created by the Linux Kernel community and is a
simple statement that you, as a contributor, have the legal right to make the
contribution.

In order to show your agreement with the DCO you should include at the end of the commit message,
the following line: Signed-off-by: John Doe <john.doe@example.com>, using your real name and email.

This can be done easily using the -s flag on the git commit.

If you find yourself pushed a few commits without Signed-off-by, you can still add it afterwards.
```

## DCO Bot

TODO

## Merging Pull Requests

TODO

> # Open Questions

Reviewer 4: I think that there's one more problem worth thinking about: how do we enforce that the CI has passed when merging into master?

* Should we include a PR template, or do we leave this up to the first time
  contribution bot?

> * Can we disable the merge button on GitHub?

Reviewer 4: No. https://github.com/isaacs/github/issues/5 Somebody posted there a workaround, that by protecting the branches with impossible rules one can effectively turn the green button of doom into a red button of nuclear wasteland.

As far as I know GitHub doesn't support `ff-only` merging of PRs, there's now way to prevent it from adding its commits.
